Internally, it appears there's a mindset that face-to-face is a "better experience" than online. This feels like a blindspot, and we need to reframe the conversation; face-to-face is a "different experience" than online. We should discuss ways in which we can foster community and meaningful interactions for student and clients in the online realm considering the current (and potentially future) crisis situation.
How to emerge from the crisis in a sustainable way. There is no secret, that companies and countries are obsessed with economic growth. Can we acknowledge that corona pandemic is related to the climate crisis and business cannot work as usual anymore?
More online programs for ExEd, we are quite late with this and could have had a better position in this corona situation. More online marketing: Instagram account for ExEd, LinkedIn, Twitter - just be more present. Maybe offer some free online sessions for target customers. Don't be too formal with participants, mainly in German programs.
Let me start with a general statement before I go into the particular questions. The only way to thrive in the next 10-15 years is by combining top-quality research (and researchers) with new and relevant educational products. Schools that have no internationally recognized researchers will quickly disappear because, with the steep increase in online education, there is no way to charge a premium price if you are one of thousand schools or consulting with speakers who have no research credibility and do not create own ideas. We have to be obsessively focused on hiring top-quality researchers who can teach well in class and organize our resources around this core capability. Executive Education, with a strong focus on our large German-based clients + expanding into the Mittelstand. Let's not spread thin, we are small and must focus. We'll have to think very creatively about degree. ExecEd, we need to agree on a common product philosophy that all our educational products adhere to. And within that sandbox, we have to try out very different things. The goal is to remain relevant in the premium price space. Anything that erodes our prince point is going to kill us because our cost structure is heavy. Degree: What we currently have is not going to be sustainable in 5 years from now, particularly the MBA. We should look at opportunities in the Bachelor space. If we can do what the German public system cannot do, perhaps we should move in that direction. My feeling is we don't have marketing experts driving our marketing strategy. We are amateur marketing strategists. I doubt this is a good idea. We should professionalize very quickly. Focus on the core capabilities (internationally recognized researchers who are great in class) and do everything we can to hire more of them, use their time as productively as possible, force them to engage in developing new original teaching and research that makes an impact. Then, to the side, form a team of less expensive "teaching guns" who are great in class and can help us to scale on the me-too type products. With the ratio of staff to faculty we have, this should be possible. But now we have two paradoxes. Fist, we have a lot of staff per faculty and yet little support to those faculty who could produce value to the school. Second, we have top faculty constantly teaching me-too subjects that a teaching gun teach just as well. This makes no sense in my view.
Networks are becoming more open. e.g., digital seminars rather than in person, which allows more participants, lower costs etc. This could be an advantage for us because we might have more opportunities, but so do others, and competition might increase.
(junior) faculty job market: At least in the short term, I expect much less demand for new faculty with relatively constant supply (5 year time lags, and most PhDs don't train with demand in mind). This could be an opportunity for a school that HAS to grow to reach/maintain critical mass. Growing interdisciplinarity and focus on "big challenges" (health, environment, social peace etc.).
Many (younger) students expect a business school degree to support them in their desire to move to a new country and find a job there. This can only be achieved through full-time studies, as it is connected to immigration rules. We need to show the support we provide in helping students find jobs. If German economy recovers quicker than the rest of the world, we could try to play the card of possible wider set of job opportunities in Germany for graduates and try to grab attention of students who would consider Spain, Italy, or UK as their study destinations.More ESMT EMBA students are expecting services similar to those of full-time MBA students (help with career transitions). Many of the current students aren't true "executives", but rather part-time MBA students. Maybe we need to upgrade the offerings in the EMBA, focusing more on personalization of knowledge. We need to think about professional part-time doctoral qualifications for managers. Search for quick solutions for the customer's problems. Consulting disguised as education may be one of the new expectations and could be an opportunity for us, provided that we have enough in-house expertise. Pure knowledge is available online for free or almost free. The quality of the technical execution of free or cheap offerings is increasing. If we have unique knowledge, we may want to package it nicely, with high quality of presentation (bells and whistles). We may want to see if we can generate requests for customized offers. Public offering of open online courses could probably work if we come up with a unique qualification, such as professional diploma in something attractive to the market (not general management), delivered online. Vanity of potential individual donors need to be explored further. People want their names to be connected to something longer than their life. For a long period of time we were 'basking in the reflected glory' of our founding companies, and it was helpful for us at the start, but most of their financial contributions were rather modest. Should we go bold and look for a big individual name, despite all of the risks and controversies associated with virtually any wealthy individual? The contribution should be commensurate with the risk. 
Experiential Marketing. A current trend which already influences us is oversaturation. We are constantly and everywhere fed and challenged by information. Our reaction should be inspired by the marketing branch of "Experiential Marketing". Mostly, we read of it in relation to interesting campaigns from large companies that attract a lot of attention. We should pull out the following aspects: In the future, marketing is not just about conveying information, but impressions, emotions and experiences. We are not merely the supplier of knowledge, but a large family, where everyone is at home: young and old, students, executives in different situations and with different needs, and, as we now see, workers. After finishing a program of study, participants are still part of the ESMT family. Even though we convince students with content, the brand is more important. "I will study at ESMT" = "I will study at Princeton". Instead of coming up with a single campaign, we base all of our actions, reactions and interactions off of this concept. ESMT itself is an experience. The "Disney Experience" does not need any description at this point and analogous to this, an "ESMT experience" needs to be developed.
Digitalization: intensified competition due to the availability of knowledge globally through digital channels (eg. Harvard online diploma available: why would one go for the ESMT one?). Response: we should focus on individual learning and the actionability of the learning. Instead of scaling up the classes (1000 people listening to a webinar) - we should offer small, personalized, customized, individualized learning elements (even if on line). Giving a boost to the learner. Using the Socratic method, very interactive. Also have a very clear focus on implementation: so how will that put into action. Encourage students and participants at exed to put theories to action and learn through the experiment. Digitally driven, but hands-on, real, implementable learning. Democratization of research and knowledge, rigor vs. relevance: more knowledge available, universities are not the only sources of knowledge. We should accelerate research processes. Focus on relevance. Be a counterpart for business for discussing the future. Hire faculty who are able to discuss with managers, able to bridge the gap between business and academia. Launch "million" research projects together with companies. New generation of learners and shortening the attention spam: We constantly need be at the forefront of educational innovation. Faculty need to see themselves as educators and scientists. New skills need to be developed and innovation in education rewarded. 
In my view, the business education industry will be intensely looking for new formats for programs delivery over the next few years. The traditional face-to-face (f2f) delivery will not totally loose its importance, but will have to give way to some extent to online delivery. The emerging format, a blend between f2f and online, will combine various technologies and physical spaces to create the most attractive offering. The blend is likely to differ between market segments, so what's good for exed may not work for MIM and the other way around. ESMT should take part in the process of experimenting, but needs to choose its strategy wisely by carefully assessing its strengths and weaknesses. First, the weaknesses. We are small and relatively poor compared to the major business schools in Europe (you may think of it as poor, but sexy, if you want to feel better ;-). Thus, I don't think that we can rush to embrace new expensive technologies, such as fully fledged virtual classrooms, holographic visualization, etc. The financial risk that these will prove a dead end, or at most sub-optimal, are too large for us. We don't have the scale to take on such risks. Likewise, betting too much on pure online delivery will most likely not be good for us. By going pure online, we strip ourselves from the location being one of our most important differentiators and engage in very intense direct competition vis-a-vis the big European and American b-schools. We cannot withstand such a competition without losing the margins that we currently enjoy, or the business altogether. Moreover, I don't see how we could establish ourselves as a platform for delivering business-education content. Which particular strength will give us a chance to compete for such a position? Which third parties will want to deliver content on our platform? Why? I think such a platform may only work under a strong brand name, which we don't have yet. LBS or INSEAD, but not we, may perhaps pull off such a platform, which main function will be checking the quality and rubber-stamping third-party content. So what are our strengths? First, these are credentials of our faculty, who consistently score very high on student satisfaction. Second, it's the location: Berlin, Germany, Europe. We've also made headway in the professional online content's creation. I also believe that we are still quite agile, all of which should allow us to design new attractive blended formats quickly and experiment with them. The part-time MBA is a good start. Let's see how it works (or doesn't work) and learn from it. I don't think that we need a fancy and expensive technology to beef up the online part of the blend. Our current technology is reasonable and I'd advise to take a smart follower approach to the technology investment. Just look what works for the others and quickly ""copy"" the technology. We should rather play on our strength and stress the f2f part of the blend that takes place in Berlin. The location is attractive for various groups of students/participants for different reasons, a cool place, an innovative place, an entry point to Germany/EU, etc. We need to understand the crucial reasons across the participants groups and use this in marketing. A big part of the attraction of f2f, other than meeting the faculty in person and spend time in Berlin, is peer-to-peer learning and networking. In my view, 'bonding with interesting people in an interesting place' is the part of our value proposition, which cannot be easily copied by others now and in the near future. We should build on that as much as we can while creating blended programs of all kinds. In addition to Berlin, as the place to be, we should also utilize the attributes of the campus. There is a scope for improvement in this respect. For instance, we severely under utilize the campus garden, which requires some investment. The new campus buildings, which we plan to erect, could also play a role in creating the campus/meeting place feeling. Let's not waste them for degree students housing. Instead, let's create some sort of executive development center with hotel-like facilities for participants, some conferencing/lecturing facilities, some cozy lounges, a nice place to have a coffee during the day and a drink in the evening. If we believe that f2f component of the blend is our main attraction and differentiator, we need to create a real campus at Schlossplatz 1.
ESMT faculty is still very small and need further top quality researchers to establish its reputation as a research based Business School. I therefore think we need to put research and faculty growth as the first objective going forward if we want to keep our research focus. We have been growing in degree programs by adding new programs and extending existing ones. However, the faculty growth promises have not been realized due to losing some faculty and not being able to hire as many top quality faculty members as we need to reach our growth targets. As a result, most of the faculty is overloaded, i.e, we have reached teaching capacity of our faculty. Overloading research active faculty will have a significant cost: Less research, lower top quality publications, reduction in research reputation. This will hit our strongest point (top quality research and faculty as identified by Wissenschaftsrat). I also think we would have hard time attracting top quality research active faculty if we put further teaching obligations and do not grow the faculty. The small size is dangerous as it could be threatened easily by poaching from other institutes; one or two good researchers leaving will make our faculty even smaller and trigger further faculty leaving... We cannot afford this. I therefore think the faculty growth and improving research conditions should be the most important objective looking forward. 
In my point of view, whether it is business education as a whole or just ExEd programs, our faculty is relatively insufficient in terms of topics that they can teach. We have a small faculty, yet their expertise are always about leaderships and strategy. Not many of them cab smoothly hit the points with executives, as in they lack of industrial experience (often good on paper but really not practical, no human touch whatsoever). Therefore, growing faculty is one thing - focus on hiring who has a much larger exposure with industries and has the ability to teach. Also, we do not live up to our name (technology part). Oftentimes we face the situation in customized ExEd programs that clients ask for innovation and digital transformation, we have no internal faculty that we can brand and offer. About communication & marketing: honestly, I think hiring a professional marketing agency is quite essential here - currently it is feeling like a team of amateurs trying this and that out on social media or whatever and just let it be. I don't see a marketing strategy or plan. I see so many colleagues are so eager to be involved in all sorts of projects for the good of the school - but let us face it - some of the tasks you need to hire professionals to do them! Setting up a task force internally and try to solve your own problem sounds heroic but counter-productive. 
I'm unsure as to where exactly these points belong so please categorize as appropriate. Improving the Reputation of ESMT as tier-1 business school in Germany [Degree]. Despite its successes in various rankings, among the very best (German) students, ESMT is not perceived as an attractive place to study. Evidence for this is that there are relatively few placements of ESMT graduates in jobs perceived as ""elite"", in particular, consulting jobs at BCG/Mckinsey or top jobs in investment banking. Despite ESMT being hailed as entrepreneurial school, as of now no highly successful startup has been founded by ESMT alumni. Other German business schools such as Mannheim, HSG, WHU, HHL or even EBS are perceived as more successful by many prospective German students in producing graduates being able to compete at the very top. Further evidence for this can be found by reading (German) online discussion forums that both reflect and influence the views of prospective applicants. This is a problem for at least two reasons: The perception discourages potential applicants, limits ESMT’s ability to increase tuition, deprives students of high-performing class mates and weakens the value of the alumni network. Moreover, people’s view of the value of a university is formed when researching potential places to study and is rarely updated later in life. Thus it persists and informs decisions by people who become potential recruiters, EMBA applicants, ExEd customers or donors. What can be done? ESMT is in a good position to change this given its position in international rankings, its outstanding faculty as well as being located in a much more attractive place than its (domestic) competitors. ESMT should aggressively court its top applicants, especially those that have the clear potential to be placed in the highest-paid jobs. The best way to achieve this would be to create a number of prestigious “full ride” scholarships for both MBA and MIM programs that are used to attract these very top students. Furthermore, some of the top consulting firms offer their employees educational leave programs where their firm pays MBA tuition fees. Using its networks, ESMT should lobby hard to get on the list of schools whose MBA is paid for by the firms (for example, BCG has a list of top schools – ESMT not among them – where students get extra financial support if an employee does its MBA at that school). Introduce a “Master of Computer Science and Management” [Degree]. There is likely a growing demand for a Master’s degree that offers a more technical combination of Computer Science and Management, along the lines of a Master in “Wirtschaftsingenieurwesen” (except with a focus on Computer Science rather than general engineering as is taught in German engineering schools). There is a fast-growing number of jobs at the intersection of Computer Engineering and Management and not enough graduate to fill these roles. At the same time, there are very few options for people without a formal background in Computer Science/Engineering to acquire competencies in this area from a renowned institution. A “Master of Computer Science and Management” would offer to technically-inclined people with no formal background in Computer Science to acquire IT-related competencies and skills, e.g. coding, cybersecurity as well as data analysis, including AI/Machine Learning techniques, in combination with management science. Given the demanding nature of the courses, it would be important to select the right kind of students. Likely, this will appeal to candidates with backgrounds in quantitative disciplines. This could lead to the perception of this Mater as an “elite” program, which would be an additional benefit. The degree could be offered as a dual degree program with a technical university as partner institution. Alternatively, the Master is entirely programmed in-house. Although ESMT is already strong in areas like Cybersecurity and Data Analysis, some of the more Computer Science-oriented courses would have to be taught by external faculty. If this program is successful, this may also be an opportunity to hire (more) faculty in areas such as AI/Machine Learning which would benefit the school as a whole. Spend the school’s endowment counter-cyclically and invest when other schools don’t [Finance]. Currently, business education (and higher education more generally) is in crisis. Given ESMT’s competencies in the digital space as well as its location in Germany, that – so far – has been uniquely successful in European comparison to withstand the epidemic, also economically, there is a great chance that ESMT will emerge from the crisis in a stronger position than most of its European peers. Due to financial pressures, competitor schools will have a hard time to invest. This implies that a lot of great talent – academic and other – may soon be looking for new job opportunities. ESMT should try to take advantage of that opportunity and hire talent. The s+B16ame logic holds true for business opportunities in areas like ExEd. In a nutshell, instead of cutting spending, ESMT should invest during the crisis. Any Euro spend during a downturn will yield high returns in the future. This strategy is feasible as ESMT has (one of) most significant endowment of all German business schools. ESMT should use up some of that endowment now, and commit to returning money to the endowment fund later. This strategy may enable ESMT to take advantage of opportunities and even growing its endowment in the long-term. Buy/Construct a student dorm [Degree/Finance]. Buying and/or constructing a student dorm is likely a great idea for a number of reasons. I am aware of plans to construct one in ESMT’s own garden, but I will make the case for constructing additional ones outside of the campus, especially given the missing construction permission for the one planned. Owning and running student dorms/apartments is beneficial for at least two reasons: One, foreign students are having great difficulties navigating the Berlin property market and their difficulties are likely to get worse given recently introduced rent regulations (“Mietpreisbremse”, “Mietdeckel” etc.) and the associated decrease in supply of rental apartments. Thus offering nice accommodation makes ESMT’s degree programs more attractive. This is even more the case if running ESMT’s own student accommodation uses a pedagogical concept that makes it easier getting to know and be friends with classmates. This has the potential to increase the emotional ties of ESMT students to their time at ESMT in Berlin. Secondly, the above-mentioned regulations make it less attractive to rent out regular apartments. However, short-term rentals (max 1-2 years) of furnished apartments to students in conjunction with other services, e.g. meals, as well as in combination with educational programs, mean that some of the regulations may not apply ESMT. This could also be achieved by clever pricing models where part of the accommodation is indirectly paid through tuition. Thus, running student accommodation appears to be a natural second line of business for a private university like ESMT. Manage and limit exposure to China [Risk Management]. One strong and growing trend in international politics and business is the geopolitical conflict between the US and China. While as of now the implications for Europe are unclear, this trend is unlikely to bypass Germany. Importantly, these developments are largely outside the control of ESMT. While ESMT should advocate for international and bilateral business ties between Germany and China, it is probably unwise to become dependent on business (either ExEd or Degree) from that country. On the one hand, a sudden stop in Chinese business – be it as sanction from the German side or (more likely) as punishment by China for political action taken by the German side  – would leave ESMT with a sudden loss of revenue. An additional risk is that Chinese authorities/customers use their leverage over ESMT to e.g. force ESMT to cancel appearances by persons considered undesirable by Chinese authorities (there have been instances of this happening in the UK and Australia). This would hold large reputational risks for ESMT. Hence, given ESMT Shanghai’s office, a large number of Chinese applicants in Degree, as well as potential ExEd programs for Chinese state-owned enterprises, ESMT should carefully evaluate risks associated with its dependence on the Chinese market. To be true to its values, it should unequivocally state its commitment to free and critical speech.
We are doing good as a school by offering all kinds of degree and ExEd programs despite of the limited facility. Is there any possibility if we could also function as a platform? Taking advantage of our network to enable the communication between, e.g. students and Professors, executives from companies in different continents, etc.
For ExEd I see the following trends and demands. Stronger individualization demanded, more impact and more personal relationships. Combination of individuality and collective. Small business opens up more and more and offers a wonderful source of revenue. Which pricing model and offering? Smaller and more individual cohorts? Competition increases (Consulting, training insitutes, own business academies, business schools and universities). How can we take their home port? International institutions are still approaching us, but few international businesses do. More and more online and blended, which will play a role after corona. Hierarchy spanning seminars. Bookings for OE come later. More private payers, more B2C business. Wish for consortial exchange with different companies. Connect research projects with seminars, small exclusive clubs. Cascade down seminars to different levels. Start with senior executives in small groups, then break down to middle management. Demand for design competency in seminars such that this need not be handled by companies. Delivery then specifically not by us, but within companies or by trainers. Demand for upgrade to degree. Demand for flexibility and more dates in open education. Keep conferencing tools and experiences. Especially big companies demand "WOW" to impress. Our different customers have different demands and needs, which makes the intensity of care differ.
Consultants entering teaching business. E-learning in the mass market for learning (less relevant for top-league of executive education). Demystification of academic management research in Western societies/less willingness to pay money for it.
In my view, climate change (and other environmental issues such as plastic and waste management in general, loss of biodiversity and industrial agriculture) is the most urgent and at the same time the biggest ""trend"", that will have a huge impact on world economy and our core business sooner or later. Every other trend can only be half as important, because a functioning planet and environment is literally our life insurance and they are in very concrete and immediate danger. Therefore, we should really put a lot of effort in supporting research and hiring faculty that enrich our knowledge in sustainability management, circular economy, business ethics, sustainable innovation, green energy…). Developing curricula that integrate these kinds of topics throughout (i.e. not only having one sustainability class, but treating it as an interdisciplinary issue that is discussed in different contexts, e.g. case studies.) (Here for example a link to a collection of case studies on circular economy. Developing the CSBL with more staff and resources. Hire a Sustainability Officer with the mandate to analyze and push for sustainable organizational change. Offer a sustainability-related open enrollment program (as far as I'm aware, almost no other school is doing this yet).
I hope the McKinsey-project will provide an in-depth market study on these factors 
future trends. much more blended, I do not expect an ever-growing demand for online only (apart from current and any possible future crisis situations) as it leaves out the highly appreciated part of networking/interaction. blended more in regard to 'add-ons', creating more individualized journeys rather than replacing face2face. Emerging technologies and mix of media/formats combined with practicality of content and immediate practical application to own workplace/situation might become more important than content delivery itself. Increasing digitalization, generation Y and Z and their demands, work-life balance, new work. how we should respond. regularly monitor trends and developments (dedicated group with recommendation function?), have a responsive, pro-active approach to what our products are about/going to be rather than reactive. Look at didactic, open and experiential learning and 'check' our offers from a student/participant perspective on regular basis; might even include direct surveying. Whatever the future holds, define clear USP and stick to it / adapt innovative ideas around it.
Executive education. The following trends can be observed. More and more digital learning providers on the market, some with subscription models and an immense selection, e.g. LinkedIn Learning, Udemy or Shaw Academy. The trend towards e-learning will probably receive a massive boost from the corona epidemic. More and more companies are outsourcing their training to service providers such as learning platforms or ERP systems or they are running their own academies. The corona epidemic is likely to increase price awareness. High prices will be more difficult to enforce. It may be that after a period of distance rules and remote learning, people will want to get back in touch with others, and that is our big advantage, because we are already strong here and have an outstanding reputation. As a small business school with limited resources, I believe that we can only be successful if we build on our strengths: First-class content, outstanding faculty, creating added value for participants through diversity and internationality.
The legitimacy of business schools (what they do, what they charge ...) is being questioned. Traditional market segments will shrink; hefty fees without brand power will be increasingly rejected. Customer will increasingly value options, modularity, options, choice. Transactional learning will move online even faster. Cross-border online cooperations may offer opportunity. Full online offerings without massive brand power will fail to make money. Less event based marketing, increasingly more digital.
Executive Education. ExEd and OE has the same target audience as the Executive MBA. It could be an option to bring both together, e.g. by opening EMBA courses for open enrolment participants. This would bring more diversity into the classroom and would save expenses for running a course. Participants that choose to write a test at the end of the course/a module can receive credit points which can be counted towards the degree, in case they decide to do the EMBA at a later stage, offering them a discount for the EMBA since they already paid for part of it. This would make participating in the EMBA more attractive and offer more flexibility to working professionals who want to start with a few courses/certificates before committing to an EMBA. Degree Programs/Blended Learning: The biggest trend in lifelong learning is surely online, digital, and blended learning. I see huge potential in this market for ESMT and am pleased to see that we are already taking important steps in this direction. Research: ESMT's faculty needs to grow and it could also be a valuable option to hire more junior researchers, e.g. postdoctoral researchers as well as PhD students who do not receive a full stipend (as they currently do), but who instead have a part-time job in a research project in which they gain crucial practical experience. Research grants would be key here, both to finance these positions and projects, but also to underline ESMT's research excellence even more. Professors need to understand that receiving research grants is a valuable asset for their own CVs and to stand out in the academic community. They should not be incentivized by paying bonuses, but instead it should be clear that ESMT expects them to perform well in their research. Obtaining a grant is just part of this performance (as it is common practice at German research institutions). Furthermore, research centers and institutes at ESMT should be built with a strategy in mind - not just because funding is available. Performing contract research should be a major part of a center's funding strategy, and the same rules (for funding and in general) should apply for each center, not just depending on individual agreements between the president and a professor. As one of Germany's best business school, it is crucial that ESMT finally puts more emphasis on entrepreneurship, not just in research but also by supporting students' entrepreneurial endeavors and by connecting with the start-up ecosystem. Having an Entrepreneurship Center that provides these services to our own students, to other interested parties (could be a revenue potential), and to the start-up ecosystem in Berlin (marketing potential) is crucial.
Target firms damaged by corona virus. Product offers: Algorithms and AI for business. Social responsibility and competitive impact. Resilience of businesses. Reverse mentoring
Although the school is called European School of Management AND TECHNOLOGY, it does not live up to its name. Many MBA students have been referring to this point in the past years. Some actions to consider. 	IT training for Faculty members. (Example: Most professors do not even know that there is a digital whiteboard option on the desktop computers in the Auditoriums. Therefore, they keep using the paper-based flip-charts, which is a) less visible for students and b) waste of paper. I see hesitance from Faculty, regarding embracing new technologies in the classroom). 	Setting up video cameras (permanently) (The Auditoriums are already equipped, but not all seminar rooms have the capacity for live-streaming yet. This might be very useful in case of a further corona virus wave, when participants are not allowed to travel abroad.). Setting up an incubator/project lab for students (As far as I know, there is an initiative on the 3rd floor already. (?) However, it would be great to communicate the plans with staff members and students as well. Most of the students have no idea about the campus-based Techstars). 	More support and visibility for Technology (and other student) Club events (The communication of student club events must be further improved. The student clubs manage to organize extremely interesting events and invite terrific guest speakers. These events should be more visible and open to the whole ESMT community). Another highly criticized aspect of the school (that MBA students and I also share) is the lack of gender balance and diversity. Some suggestions for improvement: 	Hiring female faculty members (I am aware that this is a well-known aspect while hiring new faculty members and there is a quite big competition for qualified and experienced female professors worldwide. Still, looking at the almost all suited-white-middle-aged-men overview of our Faculty members makes me think that ESMT got stuck in the 60s. This is certainly not a good selling point for the school). Having female (and culturally diverse German/non-German male) Supervisory Board members (The current members are: Werner, Roland, Michael, Andreas, Joachim, Jürgen, Christoph, Thomas and Karl. Enough said). 	Using culturally diverse business cases and simulations (Ca. 90% of the business cases used in the MBA program are from HBS, which is very US/Western-focused. Most cases lack of diversity from the cultural and gender aspect alike . It would be great to encourage Faculty members to write such cases too). 	Inviting female and culturally diverse guest speakers (For teaching sessions, MarCom and Development events, MasterClasses, Open Lectures, etc. Having Susan Hodgkinson on board was a great start). 	Celebrating cultural diversity (It would be great to openly celebrate the diversity of the school community from time to time. As an example: the MBA class of 2019 organized an international potluck once which was a huge success and initiated lot of culture-focused discussions between the students). Marketing: 	Setting up a Social Media strategy for marketing purposes  (Our social media presence is not really visually appealing, nor strategic. I would put more emphasis on content and visual appearance alike). 	Selling online courses via Coursera & co. (We already have some ESMT-developed online courses. How about creating a few shorter courses to provide for free or even to sell on Coursera or other similar platforms? They should certainly raise awareness about the school). TEDx ESMT (As far as I know, MarCom is on it for 2021, aka post-corona times. If only one of the Talks would go viral, it would be a great publicity for the school.). Offering a virtual campus tour (A good way to show the premises to potential students who cannot travel to Berlin in person.)
More interaction of delivering courses between degree programs and Exed. ESMT could basically offer each and every single course taught in degree programs virtually to each and every candidate with a wish to study. Pricing should be attractive and in the end a package of courses could bring a degree if the student wants to. Spread out over the time he/she needs. Leverage up more specialized Master programs: in entrepreneurship / innovation / marketing / supply chain / sustainability / diversity studies. Offer a total online MBA/Masters. ESMT should increase the marketing budget (anyway, despite the above), it is a pattern marketing budgets decrease in crises at ESMT but the opposite should happen, in times of crises people but have more time to study. ESMT should improve and align IT and media services, by far out. 
Program offerings. Understanding Emerging Markets (e.g. BRICS & many African nations). Crisis Management / Leading Under Pressure. Working together with bodies such as Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit to help German Business Leaders navigate the market in China. Social media: A separate online presence (especially LinkedIn) for ExEd, with ETP / BTM etc Networking groups for all alumni across the years.
Industry convergence. We will have more and more non B school competitors for ExEd business (consultancies, global training firms, providers of AI-based learning / coaching apps, learning curators, etc.). Our value proposition / USP is neither clear enough nor powerful enough yet to survive as much competition. Right now, we say our ExEd USP is customization and personal care. At a minimum, we need to start communicating this better to the outside world. Ideally, we should also think about other USPs we may have. Curated individual learning journeys, proof and tracking of ROI, digital experiential learning... Some of these may need more work before we can credibly claim them. Brands matter. We have a strong ranking position, but our brand is not on par with that. It's nowhere near. If we are truly a top 10 b school, we want to be in the choice set of global giants when they put out RfPs for global programs. We need to invest heavily into brand awareness. Some proprietary study that regularly generates media attention upon release of results may be a powerful tool to consider. Global footprint. Our clients will increasingly demand an infrastructure for global delivery of programs. We should build and nurture a global network of partners that can help us deliver programs across several regions, and in local language. That's the only way to win large clients. Business model. We are leaving many opportunities untapped because our business model is very narrow. Let's e.g. consider doing more consulting/coaching (we may need a seniority pyramid a la consulting to make this commercially viable) and integrating with corporate academies. Online offerings. Demand won't return fully for face-to-face programs. Some may stick with online/blended. Let's continue building a powerful portfolio of online/blended ExEd offerings, with a particular focus on experiential/action learning as a USP.
Demand for sustainability topics. Emphasis of european values such as cultural heritage, solidarity, democracy (and give this more room; and give less room to "globalization" topics). Stronger focus on "hidden champions". Need to respond to aging generation.
In general, I believe this is a very important and needed exercise for us to find the right focus, not only regarding content in research and teaching, but also in our use of resources.  Decrease in internationalization due to Corona crisis continue to build up digital competences and programs and increase regional marketing of degree programs. Executive MBA market stagnating for years. Continue offering a top-quality small program; expand the company base. Full-time MBA program stagnant; make program small and exclusive and play to the rankings; offer other specialized masters’ programs to compensate. Launch a bachelors’ program to compensate and as a feeder for masters’ programs. Continue building up digital capacity and position ESMT Berlin as top for blended executive education to reach wide audiences. Start educational consulting and paid research projects; integrate centers such as the Digital Society Institute into consulting and research projects in area of Exec Ed.  Improve cross-selling between degree program and Exec Ed marketing. Increase faculty communications output by requiring regular input to different channels (ESMT Knowledge, blog, op-ed, video, etc.). Increase short video content. Focus events on top priorities of school (vision) and say no to those of less importance. Image campaign is already in the works in run-up to 20 years’ anniversary/launch of fundraising campaign. Focus on research which is relevant to business and/or society as a whole. Promote feedback culture within ESMT as a whole and in departments and teams. Start to live purpose and values so that we focus on our own empowerment to create sustainable businesses, provide social impact, and improve the future for ourselves, ESMT, and our clients and participants. Institutionalize sourcing of ideas across the organization. Break down silos between faculty/rest; Exec Ed/other departments (in the works with job swaps, but need to be more active). Make resource management a part of yearly evaluations – What was necessary? What was successful? Where could we have used our time and personnel more effectively?
Many things are shifting online and at the same time people are CRAVING for personal connections. I think in our blended offerings we need to really think about. WHAT can be done online, and WHAT can we best offer face to face? In my mind face to face equals personal connections and experiences. Can we somehow leverage our unique location better to help our clients with exceptional experiences? Maybe we can somehow integrate our learning better with what Berlin offers...taking people out of the classroom and into the city...I don't know yet exactly how to do this either but we must be able to benefit from our prime location in this wonderful city...allowing us to do things that WHU or EBS or INSEAD can't do because they're all in the middle of nowhere. People in travel/tourism who also have an understanding of executive education might help us curate unique experiences for our participants that will make them want to come back to us again and again...I'm sorry I don't have concrete solutions here and just somewhat vague ideas but I guess that's also the point right now.
Many things are shifting online and at the same time people are CRAVING for personal connections. I think in our blended offerings we need to really think about. WHAT can be done online, and WHAT can we best offer face to face? In my mind face to face equals personal connections and experiences. Can we somehow leverage our unique location better to help our clients with exceptional experiences? Maybe we can somehow integrate our learning better with what Berlin offers...taking people out of the classroom and into the city...I don't know yet exactly how to do this either but we must be able to benefit from our prime location in this wonderful city...allowing us to do things that WHU or EBS or INSEAD can't do because they're all in the middle of nowhere. People in travel/tourism who also have an understanding of executive education might help us curate unique experiences for our participants that will make them want to come back to us again and again...I'm sorry I don't have concrete solutions here and just somewhat vague ideas but I guess that's also the point right now.
For me, there are two relevant and interrelated future trends. Data analytics: The ability to access and analyze large volumes of data to aid decision making. individual reporting: The potential to make information personalized to individual needs. We can respond to these two trends first by making sure that they are explicitly included in our teaching portfolio as topics, but also to use them in our teaching. This means using data from students to generate reports as a basis for learning or data from companies to coach executives to assess and react to specific situations. Responding to these trends implies developing tools and capabilities.
Less interest in academic peer reviewed journals combined with greater recognition of the importance of SDGs for our society. Let's turn our focus to relevant research only. Let's entirely review why we do research, align to greater goals (such as SDGs), abandon reward systems for research which is not aligned with human progress and start again. Stackable qualifications: the future of the full-time MBA is in jeopardy. The willingness to take a year off, pay 43k, and hit pause on one's career is likely to decrease in the future as more flexible options are on the table. We could think to start offering block sessions, e.g. core MBA in summer school, electives as part-time or online. Trapped by rankings: could we use this opportunity to hit pause on all rankings activity. Imagine we said as a school "we don't care about the criteria used by the Financial Times to determine what we should believe in". Instead we could say: this is why we exist and this is how we plan to measure our success. This would allow us more freedom to innovate, and allow us to close programs which might not have a future (e.g. FTMBA). Move to online - there seems to be a growing acceptance that a blended approach to education creates better learning outcomes. Our challenge is to keep the excitement of experience that humans crave (including travel to a new place, meeting new people) while becoming more efficient and effective in building learning journeys that achieve better learning outcomes than our current face-to-face offerings. Our business is a brand business. I realise that ditching rankings (above) might challenge us, but we need a more integrated product marketing approach. The artificial divide between degree and executive education teams is archaic and not understood by the customer. It would make much more sense to take a customer segmentation approach rather than a product segmentation approach.
Online learning seems to be in high demand, offering more online/blended courses that people can do in their own time from the comfort of staying at home. The topic of sustainable and responsible business in our world of deteriorating climate and vast (and still growing) inequalities seems of utmost importance, but is underrepresented/ignored almost completely in the curricula of all degree programs and executive education. (One exception that comes to mind is Christoph's course on the future of sustainable energy.). In 2019 0,9% of the global population owned 43,9 % of global assets and in this context it is important to note the link between distribution of wealth and carbon emissions and environmental degradation. ESMT is a place where people, who can make an impact in their respective fields, gather to learn about business. Business will have to change sooner or later with the prospect of climate change (think environmental disasters, droughts, rising sea levels, mass migration of people etc.). This is not a "trend" topic, because people do not want to face this. However, ESMT should address this in its output and through doing that shape the future of how business is perceived and done. It does not have to mean that ESMT has to "abolish" itself, rather ESMT can be on the forefront of shaping the discussion around the topic. This could be done through engagement of speakers, course offerings or events.
Clients & product offerings: I believe there is a significant overlap in clients who are interested in ExEd as well as the EMBA program and that we should make use of this potential. Specifically this means that clients who successfully attended specific ExEd courses could gain credits for the EMBA program. Should they at one point in the future want to attend the EMBA program, these credits are used to a) reduce the price of their program and b) give them the possibility to skip the specific course that they earned their ExEd credits in. This would lead to people, who currently do not think about attending the EMBA program due to time or financial constraints to reconsider. Given ESMT's current ranking for ExEd, this will lead to a great synergy between ExEd and degree and will boost our client base by costing us next to nothing. Threats: One of ESMT's biggest threats is the severe lack in entrepreneurship offerings. Don't get my wrong, what we currently offer is great, but it simply is not enough. Students regularly demand more focus on this topic and alumni lament the lack of this during their studies. The entrepreneurship track offering in the MBA program is a good start but I believe that ESMT is not tapping into the full potential it has. Ties with the local start-up scene have to be improved and further developed. We have a great network of alumni, business and personal contacts in this sector. Please make strategic use of it.       
In the EMBA we have seen a lot of participants interested in the field of sustainability. Unfortunately, we don't offer many courses that have a sustainability component in them. Maybe it would be possible to offer more content on areas such as impact investment, social business and innovation, sustainable finance and responsible investment. Sustainability as a whole should be embedded across all courses - not just as a stand-alone course. Unfortunately, in the degrees programs we do not offer the course "Sustainable Business" anymore. The degree programs could help preparing the students more intently to drive the transformation that is needed. It will be crucial over the next 12 years to decarbonize the economy (to halve emissions by 2030 and become completely carbon neutral by 2050 to stand a 66% change of staying under 1.5 Celsius degree average global temperature increase. Anything above 1.5c will make entire countries uninhabitable). This will have monumental impacts on all sectors and businesses who continue operations as usual. The seriousness of the challenge - and how this will affect businesses - should be focused on the courses. And it is the current generations going through the business school's classrooms who will need to tackle this!
The demand in online courses! Also, the growing demand in courses about digital business, data management and analytics. Given the times, I think there could also be some demand in courses on crisis management. 
Globalization, international mobility: Double degree programs and deeper integration with other business schools and universities. Rapidly changing economy, technological advance: Cross-disciplinary engagement with computer science and engineering institutes and companies. Combining Expertise and Leadership: Joint degree programs. Digital Marketing: comprehensive SMM Strategy.
product offering - need to promote our OE programs more effectively, be more visible for our target group.
I think besides digitalization; diversity and sustainability will play a main role in the next years. There will be a demand in teaching this to students and participants. Do we have the right programs/curricula already? I think especially in terms of sustainability there's massive potential to improve from what I heard from students. Furthermore this could be reflected more in little gestures, like becoming a plastic free university (for example LUISS in Rome does that). To the digitalization topic.. EdTech is a really great start and DSI has some more potential to shine their light on the ESMT brand as well. Here's the question what's DSI's future at ESMT? If they have one how could they be integrated more? Furthermore is there a chance to connect more to tech start-ups in Berlin as more and more students are looking for this. Diversity as the last point of the three feels a bit like the last point for the decision makers as well when it comes to getting more female faculty. Is it really that hard to get qualified women? The chair is a good start in a more diverse direction at least. Furthermore we need to think about getting more female students by scholarships through sponsors. More broadly there is the question if there should be a new bachelors program? I don't have a final opinion on that as there are many pros and cons, but it should be taken into consideration. I guess that after the crisis there will be an increase of students as always after big economic crises. This brings up the room question. The finalization of Bauteil A is needed anyways in my opinion. Marketing wise the brand is nice and stable, but there's a need for more visibility especially outside the circle of business world. It would probably help to have a Bachelor's program for this. Also there could be potential for more visibility through cooperations outside our bubble just by doing things in our building like for example participating at Fete de la Musique with our garden. Resource wise there's a strong need for more inhouse produced videocontent. A videographer for MarCom and ExEd could help a lot! There’s definitely a need for more space if the next MIM class will have two cohorts as well.
I will do my best by giving some basic general thoughts and ideas in writing in limited time. More ideas and actions that I can recommend if we end up running another online collaborative session. I think that would be more efficient and cover more grounds. Maybe I am missing the format and level of specificity you have in mind, but I find it hard to do in open ended format. Digital revolution is speeded up. The dormant technologies will see scaled adoption and shape how we conduct business and how we teach business. Our research and teaching programs should be aligned with these trends.  As a small school we cannot execute the full scope of trends impacting and we do not have the scale to deliver, so we need to chose more carefully and plan growth accordingly. More digital, data -driven, and more local. More e-commerce, less traditional brick and mortar sales. Customer acquisition, retention and management through digital means. Data analytics and data driven decision making, powered by advanced data methods and AI. Predicting disruptions, risks and risk management in the value chain. The content we deliver as business educators should parallel these changes and emphasized more at all levels. Digital marketing strategies and tools (more hands on). Supply chains and risks. Data literacy and analytics skills. AI literacy  and human-tech interface, ethics in this domain. Innovation management and organizational agility to sustain. Organizing for productivity and innovation with more remote work. Climate change and social well-being and sustainability. Triple bottom line is around for more than 30 years but now we see more clearly how everything ties up together. Governments and hence businesses will have to pay more attention to their footprint, climate change impact, social and environmental sustainability. Overall, health and safety (at work, home, business, and in society) will become more central. We will observe companies incorporating social and environmental dimensions more strongly in the functional areas of business as well as core activities. A more balanced view should be promoted and we should be able to equip students and participants with the vision, knowledge and tool sets. I think there are other market trends like changes we will see in mobility, social interactions and communications etc but I believe they are more secondary compared to above. In addition to content areas, we also have to consider delivery channels. Everyone seem to agree that digital reform in business education will continue and traditional face to face instruction will continue to give more way to digital. Here the key question is what is the optimal level of digital-physical mix at different levels of programs (MIM to exec ed). People are more accepting of the idea that core knowledge can be obtained digitally online and where face to face has more impact is value-adding peer-to-peer interactions, applications that have impact, and innovative content. Accordingly, different programs will have different ratios. EMBA: the classroom experience with higher percentage of f2f versus online. MBA: stuck in the middle. MIM: more online content admissible, specialty knowledge and applications is with F2F. What needs to be also kept in mind here is the economic slowdown that will impact our market. Companies cut down training that is viewed non-essential and unnecessary travel will also be eliminated. This would mean executive education will remain to be impacted heavily. At the same time, economic downturns is when people look for retraining via degree programs or certificates, and do this more when fees are reasonable. The current outlook is plagued by travel concerns which render physical movement not so much desirable. Local also applies here and we need to be more creative and increase scale to make up for some of the shortfall in other areas. How should we respond, more specifically? Needless to say, we have to continue strengthening our research expertise along the above noted dimensions. But also translate the unique knowledge and expertise into teaching material which can be channeled to different programs. In terms of general strategy, exec ed and we need to move into customized innovative material that is offered more online. Regarding degrees programs, EMBA -Maintain, MBA - Abstain, MIM -Gain. With revised content, streams, and delivery methods and combinations. ExEd: I think here we have started to do right things, by developing short programs/courses that address novel, timely material drawn from our research and topical expertise. If companies are going to pay for something, it has to be value adding. Generic material can be purchased cheap if needed, or even internally provided. I believe if everyone developed a couple of 1/2 course or 1 course equivalent (or half day or full day material), we can assemble a great portfolio. To the extent possible, we should create these in digital online format. They can also be assembled into smaller executive program certificates which are convertible to EMBA credits if desired (or something like that). EMBA (maintain): primarily because there are synergies with executive education. Here we can consider more partnerships to take care of core material and focus on value-adding elements, that could combine the courses/short pieces prepared above. While I do realize students want to take advantage of classroom interactions, i don’t think they would mind having the fundamentals outsourced or fully online, and other parts more interactive and perhaps face to face. MBA (abstain): My feeling is that MBA is a program that is completing its lifetime in the traditional sense. I see our efforts to benefit ratio not justified either. I would consider completely closing down the f2f MBA and replace it with a cheaper online MBA and fold the planned PMBA into it. I think 1 MBA program is sufficient, and if it is going to be done, it may be better to do it full-online (with interactive sessions and some live zoom if absolutely desired). Flexibility to do in 1 or 2 years, different starts might be considered. MIM (gain): This is where we can keep the pulse of the younger generations and offer more options and streams that offer employment opportunities, in particular in the Berlin-Germany ecosystem. I would expand streams including a) AI, b)  pure global sustainability  c) retail (with emphasis on digital), d) health? and other areas. Immediately we could convert MBA online content to MIM level so that the starting “core” can be followed online. I believe this may help with students who are considering to defer, or those who are not sure if they want to travel. With a two-stage pricing policy, we can ensure that we hook them in. A much lower initial price during which they would take the online courses, and then come in to campus  for the rest, at different prices. I think the return to normal as we are used to will take longer than Fall/early new year. Such a move is necessary and if we act early, we could be the more attractive option. Extending this to the near future, it may be the model we want to explore - basic material covered online and students come in only for the later value adding custom parts, and impact projects. This would allow us to shift capacity from basics to specialized areas and novel topics and application projects. 
Digitalization: enhanced by the pandemics - pushing digital learning 10 years ahead. A deep dive into methods, didactics, efficient collaboration, networks and remote leadership could keep us on the top. Regarding implementation and technology clients already state that we are better than St. Gallen. They have the didactical depth we lack - there's a need to improve. Gamification, Apps to track learning progress, learning spaces with faculty-valuated group learning - and using collaboratively developed learning results. Lifelong learning - moving foreword to open degree for exed flexibility and possibilities to earn degrees  by individual curricula. Restricted admissions to be provided as games with proficiency - and including experiences by learning on the job - are seen as challenging quality providers for efficient peer to peer learning inside programs, keeping high-level participants. Like assessment centers - every performance-driven professional and executive is familiar with - could boost engagement and win some HR support. Professional networks - it's not just a marketing trend. Also pandemic boosted. Real issues of our alumni could show, where the ESMT exed community could deliver expertise - would be a great marketing tool if set up professionally and with some ambassador's contribution (client or/and faculty). Intensify networks & join forces inside ESMT and with clients: we have to gather around topics & issues/initiatives, not functions, organizational structures and hierarchies. The time to co-create, co-operate with clients (or potential clients) is now - also the time to put the financing of projects on the end of our priorities and go for content creation by building sustainable partnerships & networks. (pandemic boosted that one as well). There is a strong need to be appreciated by the community - formerly only popular inside the gamers, awards (and achievements, also diplomas) to rank a performance above the others (best not only by the company you are working for) is extremely popular. Awards (also our scholarships) - with a strong (media) cooperation /exploitation and a (social) media active prominent jury would boost our brand awareness. Corporate academies - with internal clients. We have to adjust to intermediate sellers inside companies (often wanting to promote our programs/products on their own - without allowing us any interaction with their target groups) - and good partnerships to other business schools and premium trainers / consultants. Increasing differentiation becoming a gap between top leadership and executives/professionals. By flattening hierarchies and applying agile work global companies change their leadership structures. Due to this development, our participants in Exed are less experienced, more diverse, have more potential but also less achievements and maybe diminished direct influence. Exed needs more and more intense reliable networks on top executive level - not only by our president & / or dean. Possibilities to address them - also to make the C- level program work, e.g. top research, faculty input / support in practice.
Promoting business and business schools as serving society. Demonstrating relevance and impact.
Target customers: ExEd / Degree: I think ESMT should extend the business with online-seminars. ExEd: Setting up an institute or center for Health Services (manufacturers, hospitals, insurances etc.). Pricing: ExEd and open programs might be offered to companies at reduced prices or set up a kind of bonus system (e.g. send us 5 employees and you get the 5th free or at a reduced rate). Communication and marketing: Offering onsite and at the same time online open lectures. Resources - rooms for rent: Although having a reduced seating capacity on campus, we could offer our space to companies that  are looking for a bigger room size. In addition to this our IT equipment on campus is better than space and equipment of hotels. 
We have to continue teaching not only management but also economics, sociology, and possibly even politics. That means that we not only have to be more open to the mode of delivery (more online) but also to the content. Francis de Véricourt's decision making will definitely be a bestseller, and Jan Hagen's crisis management.
Digitalization - how can digitalize teaching, course assessment, document creation even further? what tools and practices are best and how can we customize that for different teams? EdTech - investing more in EdTech tools, building collaborative projects with other universities and educating all employees on various EdTech issues. Target customers and clients - attracting more diverse customers and clients from different backgrounds such as NGO professionals, social activists, academics, etc. Product offerings - Building online courses for different platforms - ESMT should build courses on platforms like Coursera, EdX and so on. This could be a great marketing tool and a source of revenue. Asynchronous teaching - building more asynchronous online courses that will complement the face-to-face teaching. Communication and marketing - ESMT should incentivize the alumni to come back to campus for different events  and projects even more and use this as a marketing tool to attract future students. Resources, capabilities and networks - encouraging employees to interact with colleagues from other institutions and build professional networks.
Trends: sustainability & intelligent and informed use of information. Numerous MIM students have reported that they were disappointed by the lack of sustainability issues and considerations in almost all their classes.  I know that Tamer sent out an email steering faculty toward designing about 10% of their class content to include aspects of sustainability, which is a great idea and would address students' concerns.  So actually the way we should respond is already out there and all that is remains is for it to be put into action, at least after we have adapted to the most immediate challenges posed by virus-control measures. MIM and MBA students recently brought up the fact that in most classes using cases, all the protagonists are male.  This is not surprising, given that almost all cases available for purchase are about men, according to what I have read.  I guess one way we could respond is by writing our own cases in which the leaders involved are women.  This could be for use in our own classes only, which would address students' concerns, or for sale via the usual platforms.  If I understood correctly, one barrier to this is that case writing does not earn teaching points, or not enough of them to matter, so perhaps we could reconsider our teaching point system to encourage case writing, in particular of cases that fill an ESG gap. Some MIMs have expressed that they do not find their program academically challenging in the sense of provoking independent thinking, synthesis, and analysis.  They felt like the program generally saves that only for the thesis, and would prefer to have more of this in classes throughout.  Obviously there are other students who struggle with what we do require, and others who only want to get through and get their degree, so for them the program is already what they can or want to handle.  I was thinking maybe there could be an honors track of some kind.  Since we're brainstorming, I could imagine: position papers, essays, literature reviews, debates, presentations, poster presentations. It is probably already clear who I am anyway, so...  Ideally I'd like our students to be able to use digital resources intelligently and thus become leaders who know how to both choose and use relevant and reliable information.  I can customize 10-20 minutes of a class session to show relevant information resources, which will reach the most students most effectively.  The aha effect is a sure thing, and experience shows that once students know about a resource, they use it for other courses and assignments as well.  They use them in groups, so they learn from each other about why one of them chose this data or that report.  They ask me questions, but they are higher level questions.  We need no extra investment of money for this, and I can cover enough in even just 10 minutes that it can make a difference.
Opportunity: We have an opportunity to exploit our Telekom MBA courses in an obvious and perhaps less obvious way. The self-evident next step is to *immediately* offer our TMBA, in full: to (i) other DAX companies, (ii) students in high-potential markets, such as India and China, and (iii) participants stranded at home during or displaced by the lockdowns. The less obvious approach is to develop thematically coherent sets of courses (of, say, 3 courses per set) around our pillars -- innovation, leadership, and analytics. (Other broader or more focused themes than our pillars can of course work well). Importantly, these would start as open enrollment programs, but with an explicit agreement that, upon completing more than one set of classes, our participants get a certificate, and after completing the required number of classes, they can graduate with an ESMT MBA. Response: We need to redirect marketing efforts to sell our full online program wherever there is demand. Critically, we should consider a wide array of pricing strategies, understanding that our TMBA classes -- with minimal refinement, to increase student interaction and thus decrease superfluous, day-to-day  faculty intervention -- can easily take on hundreds of students, possibly thousands. Turning from the full program, to smaller sets of classes under a single thematic umbrella, faculty participating in a given set or cluster must coordinate, to ensure there’s a clear story-line running through the material. This will require an upfront investment, to better know each other’s work. We can then update our existing framing and closing texts, drawing substantial connections between what we’re currently teaching, what’s been taught, and what’s soon to be offered. It will also be necessary to coordinate carefully between colleagues in executive education and those in degree. Finally, if it’s just three faculty pooling together their courses to teach jointly, we need marketing support dedicated to this. We need a clear, unambiguous process for securing this support. Opportunity: We have un-used space for teaching on our campus, which we will need to utilize creatively, so that social distancing only minimally increases the rate at which programs crowd out each other. The threat is that a given program (e.g. custom exec ed) gets bounced out of our building and into a hotel room. The problems with that outcome are many, but one is that going to a hotel room is not revenue-neutral (holding aside the fact that costs are also necessarily higher externally). One of the reasons why we can charge a high rate, separate from our intellectual content, is that companies are willing to pay for our university-immersion experience. Novotel cannot offer what we present on campus, physically. Response: In the spirit of “wild ideas,” we can create our own year-round, carbon-negative outdoor teaching-space on our football field. Imagine a tent to shield from rain, large portable screens for projecting PowerPoint, solar-powered heaters for the wintertime, acoustic walls (if we wish to have more than one instructor lecturing contemporaneously), and -- most important -- sponsorship by one of our founding companies deeply passionate about sustainability. We might even ask a subset of our students to offer architectural ideas on how to build this, increasing ownership of this outdoor facility on the part of our student body. The core issue of course is that we only have one AudiMax at the moment. And our green-space is a great alternative. Another alternative is that we offer classes on the top of our building, again outside. Apparently, the challenge here is that we need to add some kind of an additional fire escape(s). I realize this may appear to require an investment -- drilling into the physical infrastructure of the roof and improving the quality of some of our stairways -- but there may be faster, cheaper alternatives, such as an outdoor, attachable fire escape. I realize further that we’ve already asked the Berlin authorities twice if we can put solar panels on our roof, and have been met with a mushy, ambiguous “no,” given that ours is an historical building. Yet given the circumstances, we should consider how to put a green classroom on our roof. Or if even if it’s not fully green and sustainable, we should certainly consider teaching on the roof. (One other teaching space that seems unoccupied is Honecker’s office.).
Flexible learning environments. Contributing to open educational resources. Center for Learning and Teaching. Adaptive learning technologies. Micro-certifications.
A lot of degree students want to stay in Berlin or Germany. I see that in degree programs there are many international but not so many German students. I think it is important for our degree programs to address and recruit more German students; to be “more German” maybe. Use google ads for advertising our exed and degree programs actively. For example, when you google “MBA Germany” ESMT comes on the second page, whereas Mannheim Business School e.g. on the first. Address more German Mittelstand in executive education? I come from an area in Germany where a lot of mid-size companies are present. Most of them are family-owned but there are not considered Hidden Champions. I see a huge potential for growth in this area to win these companies as clients. What about an open enrollment program for doctors or people that work in hospitals to advance their managerial skills? I worked in a hospital for some years and what I realized is that some of the managing directors that not have a solid business education and where running huge hospitals.
Digitalization - not only technically well facilitated, but based on that, more digitalized mindset & actions in all the areas above for the whole school. Intercultural communication management - needed for the whole school. It is very important in our international work and life environment. How to gain the awareness of the particular challenges that cultural factors can bring to managing in international settings, to help colleagues collaborate better, to integrate the new comers in a better way, etc.
One of our pillars is ‘innovation’. I am all for it  - we should start more initiatives to strengthen this pillar as I feel it is a bit weak now (or not sufficiently made known about it)
In the next months, we should focus on online teaching. We are ahead of most institutions of higher education in this respect (a friend of mine working at University of Heidelberg was surprised and jealous when I told her that we have an EdTech lab that advises our faculty on how to deliver online courses), so we have an advantage here, and face-to-face teaching will remain difficult as long as a Corona vaccine is not available. But also in the long term, I do expect the demand for online courses to grow. People now know what is possible working online and from home. Travelling might be possible again at some stage, but people might be less willing to do so to save the climate, and companies might want to save on travel costs. So course content should be delivered online, as it is perfectly doable, and on-campus time should be spent on discussions, exchange and networking, which cannot be done so easily online. In general, we should reflect more on climate change since it will heavily influence our lives and businesses. In the EMBA program, we had a full, graded course on Sustainability. Now, we only have a half-length, non-graded course on "creating a better world" in the Graduation module when no one is paying attention anymore. I don't think that's appropriate.
Stronger emphasis on the European values such as solidarity, democracy, cultural heritage. Sustainability topics should be anchored across the school (programs, departments,resources). Address topics of aging generation. Innovation pillar needs more attention.
Digitalization and digital technologies as the key driver of business growth - the T in ESMT could be an opportunity to excel in teaching digital technologies, then the T would actually represent something meaningful. With the Corona pandemic, that leap towards digitalization becomes even more apparent and urgent for companies.
ESMT is still too aligned with big and predominantly German companies. While our open programs and degrees have more and more private payers, small companies and even start-ups, our content and pricing needs to be interesting for these groups. The seminars should be perceived as good investment. The location of Berlin - the capital of start-ups - demands this. Perhaps it is beneficial to look towards our closest neighbor: Poland is less than 100km from Berlin, with perfect travel connections and a very dynamic development. Both for ExEd and degree, we should do more marketing and find customers. On the other hand, our location predestines us to be information source and expert in knowledge about both east and west. I see ESMT as scouts, who on the one hand keep their customers apprised of new developments and explain the influence on the future, as well as show future trends. We should concentrate research on this use the results in degree and exed programs. We need more qualitative and praxis relevant research. Corona has shown how important real meetings with people and face to face is. For that reason, I am sure that our business has a good future and can not be replaced by online services. Nevertheless, we should be ambidextrous and offer online parts for every program - be it between modules or as follow-up for exed or executive MBA. We can no longer expect that participants join us from different continents. For those people we should make it possible to join our seminars online. Executive MBA should in the future also be connected with modules from exed. A program with a point system, in which points can be collected from both exed and executive MBA, with the goal to pass an exam and get an MBA, is the future. Generally, the future is more interaction between exed and degree faculty. We need to make use of synergy effects and existing knowledge. We can only survive as a business school by keeping the goal of what we can achieve in mind. Exed needs more flexible pricing models. We have enough fans. These should receive pricing incentives to book more programs with ESMT. 
Increase proximity to Berlin's start-up culture and new technological trends to attract talents (degree) and European (non-German) corporations (executive education). Increase focus on programming courses and increase the share of blended learning courses. Build stronger ties to other universities and cultural bodies in Berlin (musicians etc.) to make use of the creative offerings in Berlin or using the campus for such events (it seems empty too often). Make ESMT known globally via its reputation in (faculty research). Build (more) interdisciplinary research coalitions (e.g., other universities in Berlin, focusing on computer science and engineering combined with business research). Hire "star" researchers who have this kind of reputation although this might be more difficult or too costly.
Impact at Exed: Clients look for tangible impact for their investment. B-schools are expensive. Clients pay a lot money for programs. In the future, they will have tighter budgets. And they will ask for clear, tangible benefits for the money they pay. We have to offer relevant and practical knowledge AND go beyond pure knowledge transfer: we need to create impact on the organizational and individual level. We must be able to support the strategic agendas of our clients and help them with their change initiatives. We have to become change agents – not only providers of knowledge. We must ensure not only acquisition of skills but also the application of these newly acquired skills. Industry convergence at Exed: The education, training, consulting and coaching industries are converging. We have to integrate many different skills into our offerings to be able to fulfill a broad range of demands and expectations. Consultants solve the problems of their clients, but the clients learn not much. We teach concepts and tools, but sometimes, we miss the realities of our clients. We need to fill in such gaps to create real value for our clients. We must get closer to the real-life problems of our clients. Life-long learning: The need for learning and development will always exist and probably even increase in the future. People will look for life-long learning. We should be able to accompany our students/participants with different offers over their whole carriers. Global delivery at ExEd: We had again and again client requests in ExEd for delivering a large volume of courses on a global scale. But we know only few speakers in Asia or the USA which we could use for such a massive and global delivery. Even in Europe, we would run into capacity limitations. We have to find a way to respond to such demands.
Trends: Key Opinion Leaders or Icon types of speakers/thinkers largely shape the trend topics and influence what corporate / students want to learn from us. They get influence by 'being out there', creating a fan economy by producing high-quality podcasts, launching books with teams, presenting at key conferences, distributing newsletters. This is both opportunity and threat for ESTM: on the one hand, by 'partnering' and including the right people into the ESMT ecosystem, we benefit from their fan base. On the other hand, these KOLs and their teams get an increasing share of companies' L&D budget. ESMT's response could be more active scouting of speakers (which we partially already do at ExEd), and co-developing content with these people to shape the topics rather than being reactive. In general, being good is not good enough - proximity to customers and interaction with customers is becoming more and more important. As we are at the higher end of the price of educational service, the customer journey (student and exed) is quite long. Other business schools, centers, service providers are becoming very aggressive in 'value driven' content delivered to customers much more frequently than ESMT does. Most people, even in Germany, or in Berlin, have no idea what ESMT stands for, and that we are the best/No. 1 business school in Germany. Ask if Mannheim people don't know Mannheim is the best German business school. Mannheim might be a special case, but it remains indisputable that we are not so well-known as we wish we are. The traditional career path is no longer there. Future generations of work force may not want to become a 'leader' - knowledge workers or experts are becoming more respected and winning popularity. Hard tech skills are becoming more relevant for senior management. For degree, Tech MBAs are crowding the market. ESMT can specialize in the combination of for example  'engineering background' + 'business innovation'. Something that is matching the younger generation's expectations.
I would like to call this new market trend education 4.0. If you refer to the original term, industry 4.0, it basically means mass personalization, but in education industry. On the one hand we will need to come up with personalized solutions that fulfills individual learner's needs, on the other hand we shall support our clients to up skill their employees in a larger scope, and with speed. We are excellent at crafting educational programs that perfectly targeting on our customer's problem to be solved because we are small, flexible and very customer-oriented. But what if it's no longer 20 managers we are training, but 2000, and the company would like to accomplish the project in a year time? Plus we shall identify and design learning solutions that fulfill each of the 2000 individual's needs based on their personal interests, existing skills and potential development areas? This kind of scenarios emerged more and more in the last years and each time I am confronted with such situation, I feel we do not have the capacity for that and this is definitely not within our comfort zone. This, in my opinion, naturally leads to three potential perspectives: 1. An very obvious one, is to invest to expand our capacity, especially in terms of faculty, and not only just faculty but faculty that can teach executives & focuses on the relevant topics that suit the market's demands. Please do excuse me for speaking purely from an ExEd perspective here. The answer may seem too obvious but the solution remains unclear here: where do we get the money to invest? If we are investing, how do we make sure we are making the right investments that support the sustainable growth of our business? And in which way do we want to make it happen? Through organic growth? Though M&A? And, and, and so on... 2. Ok, invest to own may not be the only option here. Let's think about alternatives: aligns, networks, collaboration, platform and eco-system. Let's take Duke CE as a role model and see if we can head towards the direction of an education network. But to make it work, we may need more experiences/ trainings/ employees with particular set of skills/ different organizational structures etc....And the business model here may be different as well, another factor to be considered... 3. Last but not least, this leads to the old topic digitalization - mass personalization, enabled by technology, right? No organization digitalizes for the sake of digitalization. We digitalize to better serve our clients' needs, to create value for them as well as for ourselves. Digital transformation, another big topic... In the end of the day, I think the major question I am asking myself is: do we want to stay with our niche strategy, be a smaller player, remain in the second league and keeping doing what we do but do it to the best? Or do we want to target on another market segment, step out of our comfort zone, follow or even lead the market trend? For me, this probably comes back to the classic topic of ambidexterity, exploration vs. exploitation. Can we do both at the same time? This is what I believe to be the major strategic decision we will need to make together, in order to achieve excellence made in Europe 2025.
I think we are all aware of the threats – reduced international travels, economic impact on companies and even the possibility of the isolation of the European block. The main opportunity I see in this context is to forge meaningful and deep alliances with other business schools in Europe (or perhaps the US) of high reputation – for the MBA and perhaps MIM programs but also PhD program and research. All Business School are currently going through the same soul searching and partnerships that were not possible before may now be doable.  What about an HEC – ESMT alliance for instance? 
Target groups and customers: Proposal and current situation. Continue personal and individual relations with customers, to differentiate from other institutions. No down-sizing of human resources toward customers, because the administrative load has increased in the past years (more consulting, decentralized sign-ups, processing and checking of invoice related documents). Trend of private bookings and invoices with a high private part. Trend towards later or last-minute bookings. Trend to use platforms for booking, as many large companies have outsourced seminar bookings.
